Subject: [RESEARCH SUBMISSION] Pravaha: Causal Inference Framework for Multi-Fault Satellite Diagnostics

Dear ISRO Team,

I am Atiksh Sharma, a 14-year-old programmer from Assam, currently in 8th grade at Sarala Birla Gyan Jyoti School. I am writing to introduce Pravaha, a research-based hobby project that I have developed to address a critical gap in satellite health monitoring systems.
For the past few months, I have been exploring how causal inference can improve satellite anomaly diagnosis, particularly in complex multi-fault scenarios where multiple subsystems degrade simultaneously. Current satellite health monitoring systems typically assume single-fault conditions and rely on threshold checks or basic correlation analysis. However, in real-world operations, failures often cascade and interact in ways that traditional approaches struggle to handle. Pravaha is my attempt to solve this problem.
The framework models the power and thermal subsystems of a satellite as a causal graph with explicit mechanisms describing how failures propagate. When anomalies are detected in telemetry, the system traces these deviations back to their root causes, ranks them by probability, and explains the reasoning in terms of engineering principles. This approach provides transparency that is crucial for a mission-critical domain like satellite operations, where explainability matters more than raw accuracy.

Here is what Pravaha does in practice:
- Diagnoses root causes in multi-fault scenarios (beyond single-fault assumptions)
- Models power-thermal coupling and cascading failures
- Returns ranked hypotheses with confidence scores and mechanistic explanations
- Enables controlled experiments through realistic simulators

The codebase contains approximately 1500 lines of production code and 600 lines of tests. The causal graph includes 7 root causes, 23 intermediate and observable nodes, and 29 edges with weights and mechanisms. The inference engine uses Bayesian graph traversal with consistency checking to score hypotheses.

Initial benchmarking on six diverse scenarios (power degradation, thermal drift, and multi-fault combinations) shows that the causal approach ranks root causes more accurately than a correlation-based baseline. While both achieved 83.3% top-1 accuracy on these scenarios, the causal approach had a better mean rank (1.17 vs. 1.33), suggesting that as complexity increases, the advantage of explicit causal reasoning grows.

The complete framework is production-ready and includes:
- Well-commented, modular source code
- Comprehensive documentation (README, architecture overview, quick-start guide)
- A test suite with integration tests
- Example scenarios demonstrating the workflow

To run the framework:
```bash
git clone <repo>
cd pravaha
pip install -r requirements.txt
python main.py           # Run nominal and degraded scenarios
python -m unittest discover tests/ -v  # Run test suite
```

I am submitting this project because I believe it could be valuable to ISRO, but I also recognize that it is a proof-of-concept that needs refinement and validation. This is why I am reaching out—I would greatly appreciate feedback, contributions, or guidance on how to improve the framework further. Whether it is suggestions for additional subsystems, better fault models, validation against real satellite data, or architectural improvements, any input from the ISRO team would be immensely helpful.
One note on future improvements: if you are comfortable with it, I would suggest considering a Rust reimplementation of the simulator component. Rust offers memory safety guarantees and performance comparable to C/C++, which would enable higher simulation throughput for extensive benchmarks, deterministic performance without Python's GIL constraints, and easier integration with other tools via C FFI bindings if needed down the line.
Currently, the framework is ready for ISRO's evaluation and can be extended to additional subsystems (communications, attitude control, etc.) or a larger benchmark suite with noise and missing data. However, it is not yet ready for integration with real satellite telemetry, as I lack access to actual satellite operational data.

I would be grateful for any feedback you might have. Please let me know if you would like to see additional scenario runs, have questions about the implementation, or would like to discuss potential next steps.

Thank you for considering Pravaha. I look forward to hearing from you.

Best regards,

Atiksh Sharma
Grade 8, Sarala Birla Gyan Jyoti School
Assam, India
